==========================================================================
CSL Meeting Presentation on PBBS
==========================================================================


Title: The Problem Based Benchmark Suite
Abstract:
As important as engineering new architectural improvements, evaluating
these designs is crucial in architecture research. Evaluation most often
happens with the help of a suite of benchmarks that provides a realistic
and diverse workloads which also acts as a reference point to compare
different systems. There are numerous benchmark suites for researchers to
use, some general purpose, such as SPEC, while others are domain specific,
such as MediaBench. Vast majority of these benchmarks are code-based,
where the code and the algorithm is not supposed to be modified.
Problem-based benchmarks, such as The Problem Based Benchmark Suite (PBBS)
by Shun et al, instead provide problem definitions, a set of inputs, and
verification utilities. In addition, PBBS provides reference serial and
parallel implementations for most of the benchmarks, however, it
encourages researchers to solve the problem using different algorithms,
techniques or languages. In this talk, we will introduce PBBS, the
underlying design philosophy, and talk about some of the problems and
algorithms in this benchmark suite. Our goal for this talk is to spark
discussion within CSL about the benchmarks we use and trust everyday, and
to potentially encourage researchers to add PBBS to their collection of
benchmarks.
